		ILC 2003 Programming Contest
		      Judges' Report
         Nick Levine and Nicholas Barnes, 2003-10-02

The "Last Piece Puzzle" consists of fourteen polyominos which have to
be fitted into a square frame. The position of one of the pieces (the
triomino) is constrained. It turns out that there are five ways in
which the other pieces can be fitted around it. The aim of the
programming contest was for contestants to solve the puzzle, in
Common Lisp.

Details of the contest were posted on June 14th. Two entries were
received late the following day and four more over the following
week. We had a bit of a lull over the summer and then a mad scramble
at the end with 6 entries in the final four days bringing the total
number to 15 by the closing date of September 27th.

Many thanks to everyone who took the time to have a go at this.

The judges have awarded prizes as follows. In some cases we have made
an "honourable mention" of someone who did almost as well.

First working entry received: Carlos Ungil, with an honourable mention
for Pierpaolo Bernardi who was only a couple of hours behind.

The prize for elegance is awarded to Russ Ross, in particular for his
elegant description of the pieces:

        ("JJJJLLLL"
         "NNsJL3QQ"
         "TNss33Qj"
         "TNNstQQj"
         "TTWtttjj"
         "TWWZZZll"
         "WWSSFZZl"
         "SSSFFFFl")

Russ generated this description from a diagram in the contest rules
which showed the pieces in the frame but not satisfying the constraint
on the triomino.

An honourable mention for elegant coding goes to Conrad Barski, for
the following piece description:

        ((  *    )
         (  * *  )
         (  *    )
         (  *    ))

However, Conrad also gets an honourable mention in the Obscure Coding
category, for burying labels statements 6 deep. The winner for Obscure
Coding is Denis Mashkevich, for his cunning though somewhat
inpenetrable use of a "non deterministic lisp" package (which turns
out to be non-portable and so the application doesn't terminate under
LispWorks).

We also award Denis an "added value" prize, for taking the trouble to
learn lisp from scratch in order to enter the competition.

The "under 21" is prize shared by Scott Fenton and Vladimir Sedach.

Finally, we come to the speed trials. The contest rules state that
this category means: the shortest total time taken to read source,
expand macros, compile code, load compiled code, and then execute
it. No type declarations were permitted.

Because not all the entrants had found more than one solution, we
levelled the playing field by running timings on code modified to halt
after finding the first solution. However we also ran the fastest two
entries over the complete solution space and this test served to
confirm our earlier results.

Additionally, in the name of fairness, we undid the manual
precomputation in one entry. Finally, we placed the set of pieces in
the same canonical order in all entries. This made several entries run
slower (and one much slower); it also made one entry run much faster.

The test platform was a 566Mhz Celeron with 128MB memory (16k level 1
cache, 128k level 2), running LispWorks 4.2.7 on Windows XP.

We compiled, loaded and ran six shortlisted entries, 100 times
each. The averaged results for one run, with times in milliseconds,
are as follows. Note that for the top three entries, the algorithm is
so efficient that compilation times dominate.

                      Compile  Load  Run    Total

    Russ Ross           366    23    172    561
    Nils Goesche        490    95    66     651
    Edi Weitz           1296   102   452    1850
    Michael Naunton     843    61    1288   2192
    Pierpaolo Bernardi  439    35    3605   4079
    Gabor Melis         1195   100   4209   5504

We therefore declare that Russ' code ran the fastest and that Nils
came in second. Perhaps these two would like to collaborate to combine
fast compile time with fast runtime.


-------------

The "Last Piece Puzzle" is copyright (c) Blue Opal Australia Pty
Ltd. None of the puzzle designs included in this website may be
reproduced, by any means whatsoever, other than for purposes directly
related to this contest.

This document is copyright (c) Nick Levine 2003. All rights
reserved. It is provided "as is", without any express or implied
warranty. In no event will the author be held liable for any damages
arising from the use of this document. You may make and use verbatim
copies of this document for purposes directly related to this
contest. You may not mirror this document on another website. You may
not charge anyone for the use of this document.

"Windows" is a registered trademark of Microsoft Corporation. Other
brand or product names are the registered trademarks or trademarks of
their respective holders.

$Id: //info.ravenbrook.com/user/ndl/lisp/contest/2003/judges-report.txt#1 $
